README.md, before:

# Challenges

> A collection of programming challenges

## Introduction

With this educational project, I provide solutions to common programming challenges.

Below, I first describe the [aims](#1-aims) I have with the current project.
I then [list](#2-overview) the programming languages for which I solved several challenges.

## 1. Aims

My aims with this project are to:

- Extend my knowledge of different programming tools.
- Apply this knowledge in solving practical programming problems.

More generally, I strive to:

- Gain experience with different programming languages.
- Get to know the specifics of these languages.

Finally, I aim to:

- Showcase this experience and knowledge.

## 2. Overview

Currently, solutions to common programming challenges are available for the following languages:

- [Java](java)

## License

Copyright © 2021–2023 Maurits Silvis

This source code package is subject to the terms and conditions defined in the [GNU General Public License v3.0](LICENSE.md) or later.

Commit message:

Add a reference to the changelog

README.md, after:

# Challenges

> A collection of programming challenges

## Introduction

With this educational project, I provide solutions to common programming challenges.

Below, I first describe the [aims](#1-aims) I have with the current project.
I then [list](#2-overview) the programming languages for which I solved several challenges.

The release history of the Challenges project is contained in the [changelog](CHANGELOG.md).

## 1. Aims

My aims with this project are to:

- Extend my knowledge of different programming tools.
- Apply this knowledge in solving practical programming problems.

More generally, I strive to:

- Gain experience with different programming languages.
- Get to know the specifics of these languages.

Finally, I aim to:

- Showcase this experience and knowledge.

## 2. Overview

Currently, solutions to common programming challenges are available for the following languages:

- [Java](java)

## License

Copyright © 2021–2023 Maurits Silvis

This source code package is subject to the terms and conditions defined in the [GNU General Public License v3.0](LICENSE.md) or later.
