java/java-project-intellij/README.md, before:

# Setting up a Java project using IntelliJ IDEA

> A Java project set up using IntelliJ IDEA

## Introduction

With this part of the [Java challenges](..) project, I provide the code and settings for a Java project set up using IntelliJ IDEA.

Below, I give [background information](#1-background) on the project's [code](#11-java) and [IntelliJ IDEA's configuration](#12-intellij-idea).

## 1. Background

### 1.1 Java

This project makes use of Java.
I describe this programming language in the [Java section](../#21-java) of the [Java challenges](..) project.

#### 1.1.1 Code

For demonstrative purposes, the current project contains only a single Java class called `Main`, which consists of a `main` method outputting a well-known message:

```java
package nl.mauritssilvis.challenges.java.intellij.manual.projects.basic;

public class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("Hello world!");
  }
}
```

### 1.2 IntelliJ IDEA

This project is set up using IntelliJ IDEA (see, e.g., the [IntelliJ IDEA section](../#23-intellij-idea) of the [Java challenges](..) project).

The IntelliJ IDEA configuration is described in what follows.

#### 1.2.1 Configuration

The [.idea](.idea) folder of this project contains several IntelliJ-IDEA-related configuration files.
A few of these files are highlighted below.

##### Code styles

First, Unix-style line endings are selected in the file [Project.xml](.idea/codeStyles/Project.xml), which facilitates cross-platform coding.
In addition, rulers are shown at 80 characters:

```xml
<component name="ProjectCodeStyleConfiguration">
  <code_scheme name="Project" version="173">
    <option name="LINE_SEPARATOR" value="&amp;#10;" />
    <option name="SOFT_MARGINS" value="80" />
  </code_scheme>
</component>
```

##### Copyright

Automatic copyright messages, including the current year and an [SPDX license identifier](https://spdx.dev/ids/) for the [GNU General Public License v3.0](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html), are configured in the file [GNU_GPL_v3.xml](.idea/copyright/GNU_GPL_v3.xml):

```xml
<component name="CopyrightManager">
  <copyright>
    <option name="notice" value="Copyright © &amp;#36;today.year Maurits Silvis&#10;SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later" />
    <option name="myName" value="GNU GPL v3" />
  </copyright>
</component>
```

##### Inspection profiles

A code inspection profile in which all Java-21-compatible IntelliJ IDEA inspections are turned on is provided in [All.xml](.idea/inspectionProfiles/All.xml).
This profile facilitates learning about possible code improvements and optimizations.
A profile in which only the default inspections are selected is stored in [Default.xml](.idea/inspectionProfiles/Default.xml).

##### Run configurations

This project comes with a run configuration for executing the `main` method of the `Main` class.

##### Java Development Kit

This project is configured to run with the Adoptium distribution of the Java Development Kit (JDK) 21.
This setting can be reviewed in IntelliJ IDEA's project settings or the file [misc.xml](.idea/misc.xml).

## 2. Issues and solutions

### 2.1 Configuration issues

#### 2.1.1 Project JDK is not defined / JDK "temurin-21" is missing

<!-- TODO: Discuss problem with a non-existing JDK. -->

## License

Copyright © 2021–2023 Maurits Silvis

This source code package is subject to the terms and conditions defined in the [GNU General Public License v3.0](../../LICENSE.md) or later.

Commit message:

Describe IntelliJ IDEA configuration issues

java/java-project-intellij/README.md, after:

# Setting up a Java project using IntelliJ IDEA

> A Java project set up using IntelliJ IDEA

## Introduction

With this part of the [Java challenges](..) project, I provide the code and settings for a Java project set up using IntelliJ IDEA.

Below, I give [background information](#1-background) on the project's [code](#11-java) and [IntelliJ IDEA's configuration](#12-intellij-idea).
I also discuss [issues](#2-issues-and-solutions) that can occur when setting up a Java project using IntelliJ IDEA.

## 1. Background

### 1.1 Java

This project makes use of Java.
I describe this programming language in the [Java section](../#21-java) of the [Java challenges](..) project.

#### 1.1.1 Code

For demonstrative purposes, the current project contains only a single Java class called `Main`, which consists of a `main` method outputting a well-known message:

```java
package nl.mauritssilvis.challenges.java.intellij.manual.projects.basic;

public class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("Hello world!");
  }
}
```

### 1.2 IntelliJ IDEA

This project is set up using IntelliJ IDEA (see, e.g., the [IntelliJ IDEA section](../#23-intellij-idea) of the [Java challenges](..) project).

The IntelliJ IDEA configuration is described in what follows.

#### 1.2.1 Configuration

The [.idea](.idea) folder of this project contains several IntelliJ-IDEA-related configuration files.
A few of these files are highlighted below.

##### Code styles

First, Unix-style line endings are selected in the file [Project.xml](.idea/codeStyles/Project.xml), which facilitates cross-platform coding.
In addition, rulers are shown at 80 characters:

```xml
<component name="ProjectCodeStyleConfiguration">
  <code_scheme name="Project" version="173">
    <option name="LINE_SEPARATOR" value="&amp;#10;" />
    <option name="SOFT_MARGINS" value="80" />
  </code_scheme>
</component>
```

##### Copyright

Automatic copyright messages, including the current year and an [SPDX license identifier](https://spdx.dev/ids/) for the [GNU General Public License v3.0](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html), are configured in the file [GNU_GPL_v3.xml](.idea/copyright/GNU_GPL_v3.xml):

```xml
<component name="CopyrightManager">
  <copyright>
    <option name="notice" value="Copyright © &amp;#36;today.year Maurits Silvis&#10;SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later" />
    <option name="myName" value="GNU GPL v3" />
  </copyright>
</component>
```

##### Inspection profiles

A code inspection profile in which all Java-21-compatible IntelliJ IDEA inspections are turned on is provided in [All.xml](.idea/inspectionProfiles/All.xml).
This profile facilitates learning about possible code improvements and optimizations.
A profile in which only the default inspections are selected is stored in [Default.xml](.idea/inspectionProfiles/Default.xml).

##### Run configurations

This project comes with a run configuration for executing the `main` method of the `Main` class.

##### Java Development Kit

This project is configured to run with the Adoptium distribution of the Java Development Kit (JDK) 21.
This setting can be reviewed in IntelliJ IDEA's project settings or the file [misc.xml](.idea/misc.xml).

## 2. Issues and solutions

While setting up and executing a Java project using IntelliJ IDEA, you may encounter several issues.
Below, I discuss problems related to the [configuration](#21-configuration-issues) of IntelliJ IDEA.

### 2.1 Configuration issues

#### 2.1.1 Project JDK is not defined / JDK "temurin-21" is missing

When you open this project, IntelliJ IDEA may show one or more of the following warnings:

```text
Project JDK is not defined
```

```text
JDK "temurin-21" is missing
```

To solve these warnings and be able to execute the project's code, configure the project JDK in IntelliJ IDEA's project settings.
You can either select one of the listed JDKs or go for the Adoptium distribution of the Java Development Kit (JDK) by following the [Installation section](../java-project-cli/#111-installation) of [Setting up a Java project using the command line](../java-project-cli) and selecting that JDK.

## License

Copyright © 2021–2023 Maurits Silvis

This source code package is subject to the terms and conditions defined in the [GNU General Public License v3.0](../../LICENSE.md) or later.
