java/basic_maven_project_intellij/README.md, before:

# Challenges > Java > Setting up a basic Maven project using IntelliJ IDEA

> A basic Maven project, set up using IntelliJ IDEA

## Introduction

With this part of the [Challenges > Java](..) project, I provide the code and settings for a basic Maven project, set up using IntelliJ IDEA.

Below, I give an [overview](#1-background) of the project's [code](#11-java), [IntelliJ IDEA's configuration](#12-intellij-idea) and the used [Maven configuration](#13-maven).
I also detail several [issues](#2-issues-and-solutions) that can occur when setting up a Maven project, and I provide possible solutions to these issues.

This project builds on [Setting up a basic Java project using IntelliJ IDEA](../basic_java_project_intellij).

## 1. Background

### 1.1 Java

#### 1.1.1 Code

For demonstrative purposes, the current project contains only a single Java class called `Main`, which consists of a `main` method outputting a well-known message:

```java
package nl.mauritssilvis.challenges.java.intellij.maven.projects.basic;

public class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("Hello world!");
  }
}
```

### 1.2 IntelliJ IDEA

This project is set up using [IntelliJ IDEA](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/) (see, e.g., the [IntelliJ IDEA section](../#22-intellij-idea) of [Challenges > Java](..)).

The basic configuration is described in the [IntelliJ IDEA section](../basic_java_project_intellij#12-intellij-idea) of [Setting up a basic Java project using IntelliJ IDEA](../basic_java_project_intellij).
Additional details regarding the IntelliJ IDEA run configurations of the current project are given in what follows.

#### 1.2.1 Configuration

##### 1.2.1.1 Run configurations

This project comes with three run configurations.
This first run configuration is called `Main` and directly executes the `main` method of the `Main` class.
The other two run configurations, respectively, create a JAR and execute it.
Note that execution of the JAR will [fail](#24-maven-jar-plugin-issues).

### 1.3 Maven

This Java project is managed and built using [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/) (see, e.g., the [Maven section](../#23-maven) of [Challenges > Java](..)).

The Maven configuration of the current project is detailed in what follows.

#### 1.3.1 Configuration

##### 1.3.1.1 Project coordinates

In the project object model of the current project, [pom.xml](pom.xml), the so-called project coordinates are set to:

```xml
<project>
  <groupId>nl.mauritssilvis.challenges.java.intellij.maven.projects</groupId>
  <artifactId>basic</artifactId>
  <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
</project>
```

##### 1.3.1.2 Encoding

The encoding of the source files is set to UTF-8 using:

```xml
<project>
  <properties>
    <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>
  </properties>
</project>
```

##### 1.3.1.3 Maven compiler plugin

Finally, the [Maven compiler plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-compiler-plugin/) is configured as:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
        <configuration>
          <source>17</source>
          <target>17</target>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

Here, the latest version of the [Maven compiler plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-compiler-plugin/) (currently 3.8.1) is selected.
Moreover, to be up-to-date with recent developments, Java 17 is selected, which requires the [Java Development Kit 17](https://jdk.java.net/17/).

#### 1.3.2 Build

The project can be built using the command:

```shell
$ mvn clean install
```

Execution of this command will compile the above-mentioned Java class file, package it as a JAR and make this JAR available in your local Maven repository.
Note that this JAR will [not be executable](#24-maven-jar-plugin-issues).

## 2. Issues and solutions

While setting up and building a Maven project, several problems may occur.
I list several of such problems, here, including possible solutions.
Specifically, I discuss problems related to the [project object model](#21-project-object-model-issues), the [Maven resources plugin](#22-maven-resources-plugin-issues), the [Maven compiler plugin](#23-maven-compiler-plugin-issues) and the [Maven JAR plugin](#24-maven-jar-plugin-issues).

### 2.1 Project object model issues

Several issues may arise in relation to the [project object model](https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-the-pom.html).

#### 2.1.1 The goal you specified requires a project to execute but there is no POM in this directory

When executing Maven goals, the following error may occur:

```text
[ERROR] The goal you specified requires a project to execute but there is no POM in this directory. Please verify you invoked Maven from the correct directory.
```

To solve this problem, ensure the top-level directory of the project contains a project object model file called `pom.xml` and ensure Maven is run in this directory.

#### 2.1.2 Non-readable POM: input contained no data

When executing Maven goals, the following error may occur:

```text
[ERROR] Some problems were encountered while processing the POMs:
[FATAL] Non-readable POM: input contained no data
```

To solve this problem, ensure the project object model, `pom.xml`, contains at least the `project` root element.
This root element can be included without any attributes:

```xml
<project></project>
```

Alternatively, specify the optional XML preamble and namespace information:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
</project>
```

#### 2.1.3 'modelVersion' is missing

When executing Maven goals, the following error may occur:

```text
[ERROR] Some problems were encountered while processing the POMs:
[ERROR] 'modelVersion' is missing. @ line 1, column 9
```

To solve this problem, set the model version in the project object model, `pom.xml`:

```xml
<project>
  <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
</project>
```

#### 2.1.4 'groupId' is missing / 'artifactId' is missing / 'version' is missing

When executing Maven goals, one or more of the following errors may occur:

```text
[ERROR] Some problems were encountered while processing the POMs:
[FATAL] 'groupId' is missing. @ line 1, column 9
[FATAL] 'artifactId' is missing. @ line 1, column 9
[FATAL] 'version' is missing. @ line 1, column 9
```

To solve these problems, include the project coordinates, i.e., the group ID, the ID and the version of the artifact, in the project object model, `pom.xml`.

For the current project, these coordinates are given by:

```xml
<project>
  <groupId>nl.mauritssilvis.challenges.java.intellij.maven.projects</groupId>
  <artifactId>basic</artifactId>
  <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
</project>
```

#### 2.1.5 'build.plugins.plugin.(groupId:artifactId)' artifactId of a plugin must be defined

When executing Maven goals, the following error may occur:

```text
[ERROR] Some problems were encountered while processing the POMs:
[FATAL] 'build.plugins.plugin.(groupId:artifactId)' artifactId of a plugin must be defined.  @ line 21, column 21
```

To solve this problem, ensure all desired Maven plugins are identified using their artifact ID.

For example, the Maven compiler plugin can be selected with the following `build` section of `pom.xml`:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

#### 2.1.6 'build.plugins.plugin.version' for org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-compiler-plugin is missing

When using Maven plugins, a warning may be shown that is similar to:

```text
[WARNING] Some problems were encountered while building the effective model for nl.mauritssilvis.challenges.java.intellij.maven.projects:basic:jar:1.0-SNAPSHOT
[WARNING] 'build.plugins.plugin.version' for org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-compiler-plugin is missing. @ line 23, column 21
[WARNING]
[WARNING] It is highly recommended to fix these problems because they threaten the stability of your build.
[WARNING]
[WARNING] For this reason, future Maven versions might no longer support building such malformed projects.
```

To prevent this warning as well as potential future problems with your project, select the latest version of the Maven plugin in the project object model, `pom.xml`.

For example, for the Maven compiler plugin, extend the `build` section of `pom.xml` with:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

Here, the latest version of the [Maven compiler plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-compiler-plugin/) (currently 3.8.1) is selected.

### 2.2 Maven resources plugin issues

At least one issue may be reported by the [Maven resources plugin](http://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-resources-plugin/).

#### 2.2.1 Using platform encoding (UTF-8 actually) to copy filtered resources, i.e. build is platform dependent!

The Maven resources plugin may throw a warning of the form:

```text
[WARNING] Using platform encoding (UTF-8 actually) to copy filtered resources, i.e. build is platform dependent!
```

This warning indicates that no encoding has been set for the project files, i.e., for the source and resource files of the project.

To set the file encoding to UTF-8, include the following line in the `properties` section of the project object model, `pom.xml`:

```xml
<project>
  <properties>
    <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>
  </properties>
</project>
```

### 2.3 Maven compiler plugin issues

Several issues may be reported by the [Maven compiler plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-compiler-plugin/).

#### 2.3.1 File encoding has not been set, using platform encoding UTF-8, i.e. build is platform dependent!

Similar to the Maven resources plugin, the Maven compiler plugin may return:

```text
[WARNING] File encoding has not been set, using platform encoding UTF-8, i.e. build is platform dependent!
```

This warning indicates that no encoding has been set for the project files, i.e., for the source and resource files of the project.

To set the file encoding to UTF-8, include the following line in the `properties` section in the project object model, `pom.xml`:

```xml
<project>
  <properties>
    <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>
  </properties>
</project>
```

#### 2.3.2 Source option is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.

The Maven compiler plugin may halt with one of the following errors:

```text
[ERROR] Source option 1.3 is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.
```

```text
[ERROR] Source option 5 is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.
```

```text
[ERROR] Source option 6 is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.
```

To solve this problem, explicitly set the Java source version in the project object model, `pom.xml`.

The source version can be set to Java 17 by extending the `properties` section of `pom.xml` with the line:

```xml
<project>
  <properties>
    <maven.compiler.source>17</maven.compiler.source>
  </properties>
</project>
```

In addition, select the latest version of the [Maven compiler plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-compiler-plugin/) (currently 3.8.1) in the `build` section of `pom.xml`:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

Alternatively, configure both the Java source and Maven compiler plugin versions in the `build` section:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
        <configuration>
          <source>17</source>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

#### 2.3.3 Target option is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.

The Maven compiler plugin may halt with one of the following errors:

```text
[ERROR] Target option 1.1 is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.
```

```text
[ERROR] Target option 5 is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.
```

```text
[ERROR] Target option 6 is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.
```

To solve this problem, explicitly set the Java target version in the project object model, `pom.xml`.

The target version can be set to Java 17 by extending the `properties` section of `pom.xml` with the line:

```xml
<project>
  <properties>
    <maven.compiler.target>17</maven.compiler.target>
  </properties>
</project>
```

In addition, select the latest version of the [Maven compiler plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-compiler-plugin/) (currently 3.8.1) in the `build` section of `pom.xml`:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

Alternatively, configure both the Java target and Maven compiler plugin versions in the `build` section:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
        <configuration>
          <target>17</target>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

#### 2.3.4 Failure executing javac, but could not parse the error / Source release 17 requires target release 17

The Maven compiler plugin may encounter either of the following errors while compiling:

```text
[ERROR] Failure executing javac, but could not parse the error
```

```text
source release 17 requires target release 17
```

To solve this problem, ensure that both the Java source and target versions are set in the project object model, `pom.xml`.
Additionally, ensure that the target version is not smaller than the source version.

Java 17 can be selected by extending the `properties` section of `pom.xml` with the lines:

```xml
<project>
  <properties>
    <maven.compiler.source>17</maven.compiler.source>
    <maven.compiler.target>17</maven.compiler.target>
  </properties>
</project>
```

In addition, select the latest version of the [Maven compiler plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-compiler-plugin/) (currently 3.8.1) in the `build` section of `pom.xml`:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

Alternatively, configure the Java target, source and Maven compiler plugin versions in the `build` section:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
        <configuration>
          <source>17</source>
          <target>17</target>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

### 2.4 Maven JAR plugin issues

At least one issue may arise in relation to the [Maven JAR plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-jar-plugin/).

#### 2.4.1 no main manifest attribute, in basic-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar

When trying to execute a JAR, an error similar to the following may occur:

```text
no main manifest attribute, in basic-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar
```

To solve this problem, configure the Maven JAR plugin according to the discussion of potential [Maven JAR plugin issues](../executable_jar_maven_intellij#21-maven-jar-plugin-issues) that is part of [Creating an executable JAR using Maven](../executable_jar_maven_intellij).

## License

Copyright © 2021 Maurits H. Silvis

This source code package is subject to the terms and conditions defined in the GNU General Public License v3.0, which can be found in the file [LICENSE.md](../../LICENSE.md), or later.

Commit message:

Refer to Java 17 as the LTS version

java/basic_maven_project_intellij/README.md, after:

# Challenges > Java > Setting up a basic Maven project using IntelliJ IDEA

> A basic Maven project, set up using IntelliJ IDEA

## Introduction

With this part of the [Challenges > Java](..) project, I provide the code and settings for a basic Maven project, set up using IntelliJ IDEA.

Below, I give an [overview](#1-background) of the project's [code](#11-java), [IntelliJ IDEA's configuration](#12-intellij-idea) and the used [Maven configuration](#13-maven).
I also detail several [issues](#2-issues-and-solutions) that can occur when setting up a Maven project, and I provide possible solutions to these issues.

This project builds on [Setting up a basic Java project using IntelliJ IDEA](../basic_java_project_intellij).

## 1. Background

### 1.1 Java

#### 1.1.1 Code

For demonstrative purposes, the current project contains only a single Java class called `Main`, which consists of a `main` method outputting a well-known message:

```java
package nl.mauritssilvis.challenges.java.intellij.maven.projects.basic;

public class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("Hello world!");
  }
}
```

### 1.2 IntelliJ IDEA

This project is set up using [IntelliJ IDEA](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/) (see, e.g., the [IntelliJ IDEA section](../#22-intellij-idea) of [Challenges > Java](..)).

The basic configuration is described in the [IntelliJ IDEA section](../basic_java_project_intellij#12-intellij-idea) of [Setting up a basic Java project using IntelliJ IDEA](../basic_java_project_intellij).
Additional details regarding the IntelliJ IDEA run configurations of the current project are given in what follows.

#### 1.2.1 Configuration

##### 1.2.1.1 Run configurations

This project comes with three run configurations.
This first run configuration is called `Main` and directly executes the `main` method of the `Main` class.
The other two run configurations, respectively, create a JAR and execute it.
Note that execution of the JAR will [fail](#24-maven-jar-plugin-issues).

### 1.3 Maven

This Java project is managed and built using [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/) (see, e.g., the [Maven section](../#23-maven) of [Challenges > Java](..)).

The Maven configuration of the current project is detailed in what follows.

#### 1.3.1 Configuration

##### 1.3.1.1 Project coordinates

In the project object model of the current project, [pom.xml](pom.xml), the so-called project coordinates are set to:

```xml
<project>
  <groupId>nl.mauritssilvis.challenges.java.intellij.maven.projects</groupId>
  <artifactId>basic</artifactId>
  <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
</project>
```

##### 1.3.1.2 Encoding

The encoding of the source files is set to UTF-8 using:

```xml
<project>
  <properties>
    <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>
  </properties>
</project>
```

##### 1.3.1.3 Maven compiler plugin

Finally, the [Maven compiler plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-compiler-plugin/) is configured as:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
        <configuration>
          <source>17</source>
          <target>17</target>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

Here, the latest version of the [Maven compiler plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-compiler-plugin/) (currently 3.8.1) is selected.
Moreover, to be up-to-date with recent developments, the latest long-term support (LTS) version of Java (currently Java 17) is selected, which requires the [Java Development Kit 17](https://jdk.java.net/17/).

#### 1.3.2 Build

The project can be built using the command:

```shell
$ mvn clean install
```

Execution of this command will compile the above-mentioned Java class file, package it as a JAR and make this JAR available in your local Maven repository.
Note that this JAR will [not be executable](#24-maven-jar-plugin-issues).

## 2. Issues and solutions

While setting up and building a Maven project, several problems may occur.
I list several of such problems, here, including possible solutions.
Specifically, I discuss problems related to the [project object model](#21-project-object-model-issues), the [Maven resources plugin](#22-maven-resources-plugin-issues), the [Maven compiler plugin](#23-maven-compiler-plugin-issues) and the [Maven JAR plugin](#24-maven-jar-plugin-issues).

### 2.1 Project object model issues

Several issues may arise in relation to the [project object model](https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-the-pom.html).

#### 2.1.1 The goal you specified requires a project to execute but there is no POM in this directory

When executing Maven goals, the following error may occur:

```text
[ERROR] The goal you specified requires a project to execute but there is no POM in this directory. Please verify you invoked Maven from the correct directory.
```

To solve this problem, ensure the top-level directory of the project contains a project object model file called `pom.xml` and ensure Maven is run in this directory.

#### 2.1.2 Non-readable POM: input contained no data

When executing Maven goals, the following error may occur:

```text
[ERROR] Some problems were encountered while processing the POMs:
[FATAL] Non-readable POM: input contained no data
```

To solve this problem, ensure the project object model, `pom.xml`, contains at least the `project` root element.
This root element can be included without any attributes:

```xml
<project></project>
```

Alternatively, specify the optional XML preamble and namespace information:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
</project>
```

#### 2.1.3 'modelVersion' is missing

When executing Maven goals, the following error may occur:

```text
[ERROR] Some problems were encountered while processing the POMs:
[ERROR] 'modelVersion' is missing. @ line 1, column 9
```

To solve this problem, set the model version in the project object model, `pom.xml`:

```xml
<project>
  <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
</project>
```

#### 2.1.4 'groupId' is missing / 'artifactId' is missing / 'version' is missing

When executing Maven goals, one or more of the following errors may occur:

```text
[ERROR] Some problems were encountered while processing the POMs:
[FATAL] 'groupId' is missing. @ line 1, column 9
[FATAL] 'artifactId' is missing. @ line 1, column 9
[FATAL] 'version' is missing. @ line 1, column 9
```

To solve these problems, include the project coordinates, i.e., the group ID, the ID and the version of the artifact, in the project object model, `pom.xml`.

For the current project, these coordinates are given by:

```xml
<project>
  <groupId>nl.mauritssilvis.challenges.java.intellij.maven.projects</groupId>
  <artifactId>basic</artifactId>
  <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
</project>
```

#### 2.1.5 'build.plugins.plugin.(groupId:artifactId)' artifactId of a plugin must be defined

When executing Maven goals, the following error may occur:

```text
[ERROR] Some problems were encountered while processing the POMs:
[FATAL] 'build.plugins.plugin.(groupId:artifactId)' artifactId of a plugin must be defined.  @ line 21, column 21
```

To solve this problem, ensure all desired Maven plugins are identified using their artifact ID.

For example, the Maven compiler plugin can be selected with the following `build` section of `pom.xml`:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

#### 2.1.6 'build.plugins.plugin.version' for org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-compiler-plugin is missing

When using Maven plugins, a warning may be shown that is similar to:

```text
[WARNING] Some problems were encountered while building the effective model for nl.mauritssilvis.challenges.java.intellij.maven.projects:basic:jar:1.0-SNAPSHOT
[WARNING] 'build.plugins.plugin.version' for org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-compiler-plugin is missing. @ line 23, column 21
[WARNING]
[WARNING] It is highly recommended to fix these problems because they threaten the stability of your build.
[WARNING]
[WARNING] For this reason, future Maven versions might no longer support building such malformed projects.
```

To prevent this warning as well as potential future problems with your project, select the latest version of the Maven plugin in the project object model, `pom.xml`.

For example, for the Maven compiler plugin, extend the `build` section of `pom.xml` with:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

Here, the latest version of the [Maven compiler plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-compiler-plugin/) (currently 3.8.1) is selected.

### 2.2 Maven resources plugin issues

At least one issue may be reported by the [Maven resources plugin](http://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-resources-plugin/).

#### 2.2.1 Using platform encoding (UTF-8 actually) to copy filtered resources, i.e. build is platform dependent!

The Maven resources plugin may throw a warning of the form:

```text
[WARNING] Using platform encoding (UTF-8 actually) to copy filtered resources, i.e. build is platform dependent!
```

This warning indicates that no encoding has been set for the project files, i.e., for the source and resource files of the project.

To set the file encoding to UTF-8, include the following line in the `properties` section of the project object model, `pom.xml`:

```xml
<project>
  <properties>
    <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>
  </properties>
</project>
```

### 2.3 Maven compiler plugin issues

Several issues may be reported by the [Maven compiler plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-compiler-plugin/).

#### 2.3.1 File encoding has not been set, using platform encoding UTF-8, i.e. build is platform dependent!

Similar to the Maven resources plugin, the Maven compiler plugin may return:

```text
[WARNING] File encoding has not been set, using platform encoding UTF-8, i.e. build is platform dependent!
```

This warning indicates that no encoding has been set for the project files, i.e., for the source and resource files of the project.

To set the file encoding to UTF-8, include the following line in the `properties` section in the project object model, `pom.xml`:

```xml
<project>
  <properties>
    <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>
  </properties>
</project>
```

#### 2.3.2 Source option is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.

The Maven compiler plugin may halt with one of the following errors:

```text
[ERROR] Source option 1.3 is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.
```

```text
[ERROR] Source option 5 is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.
```

```text
[ERROR] Source option 6 is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.
```

To solve this problem, explicitly set the Java source version in the project object model, `pom.xml`.

The source version can be set to Java 17 by extending the `properties` section of `pom.xml` with the line:

```xml
<project>
  <properties>
    <maven.compiler.source>17</maven.compiler.source>
  </properties>
</project>
```

In addition, select the latest version of the [Maven compiler plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-compiler-plugin/) (currently 3.8.1) in the `build` section of `pom.xml`:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

Alternatively, configure both the Java source and Maven compiler plugin versions in the `build` section:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
        <configuration>
          <source>17</source>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

#### 2.3.3 Target option is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.

The Maven compiler plugin may halt with one of the following errors:

```text
[ERROR] Target option 1.1 is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.
```

```text
[ERROR] Target option 5 is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.
```

```text
[ERROR] Target option 6 is no longer supported. Use 7 or later.
```

To solve this problem, explicitly set the Java target version in the project object model, `pom.xml`.

The target version can be set to Java 17 by extending the `properties` section of `pom.xml` with the line:

```xml
<project>
  <properties>
    <maven.compiler.target>17</maven.compiler.target>
  </properties>
</project>
```

In addition, select the latest version of the [Maven compiler plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-compiler-plugin/) (currently 3.8.1) in the `build` section of `pom.xml`:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

Alternatively, configure both the Java target and Maven compiler plugin versions in the `build` section:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
        <configuration>
          <target>17</target>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

#### 2.3.4 Failure executing javac, but could not parse the error / Source release 17 requires target release 17

The Maven compiler plugin may encounter either of the following errors while compiling:

```text
[ERROR] Failure executing javac, but could not parse the error
```

```text
source release 17 requires target release 17
```

To solve this problem, ensure that both the Java source and target versions are set in the project object model, `pom.xml`.
Additionally, ensure that the target version is not smaller than the source version.

Java 17 can be selected by extending the `properties` section of `pom.xml` with the lines:

```xml
<project>
  <properties>
    <maven.compiler.source>17</maven.compiler.source>
    <maven.compiler.target>17</maven.compiler.target>
  </properties>
</project>
```

In addition, select the latest version of the [Maven compiler plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-compiler-plugin/) (currently 3.8.1) in the `build` section of `pom.xml`:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

Alternatively, configure the Java target, source and Maven compiler plugin versions in the `build` section:

```xml
<project>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
        <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.8.1</version>
        <configuration>
          <source>17</source>
          <target>17</target>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

### 2.4 Maven JAR plugin issues

At least one issue may arise in relation to the [Maven JAR plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-jar-plugin/).

#### 2.4.1 no main manifest attribute, in basic-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar

When trying to execute a JAR, an error similar to the following may occur:

```text
no main manifest attribute, in basic-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar
```

To solve this problem, configure the Maven JAR plugin according to the discussion of potential [Maven JAR plugin issues](../executable_jar_maven_intellij#21-maven-jar-plugin-issues) that is part of [Creating an executable JAR using Maven](../executable_jar_maven_intellij).

## License

Copyright © 2021 Maurits H. Silvis

This source code package is subject to the terms and conditions defined in the GNU General Public License v3.0, which can be found in the file [LICENSE.md](../../LICENSE.md), or later.
